Exploration & Travel
Exploration is the first of four pillars that support Lavender Hack, the others being encounters, factions, and downtime. One of the primary goals of Lavender Hack is to work well for hexcrawls, open-ended adventures that allow players considerable freedom in exploring the mysterious wilds.
The term hexcrawl comes from the wealth of fantasy gaming content which feature hex maps of varying scales, where each hex contains terrain of a particular type.
There are three types of exploration in Lavender Hack: wilderness, ocean, and dungeon. The goal of the exploration system is to make distances feel distant, such that resources like food are a concern, and the chance for surprise encounters with beasts and other factions is always a possibility. Wilderness and ocean exploration use hex maps.
Dungeon exploration is perhaps the trickiest to manage, because grid based dungeon maps do not provide as clean a unit of abstraction as hexes. This creates more difficulty when trying to come up with usable measures for time and distance. It also makes for more challenges when players try to make sense of where they are.
I tried to make the procedures for wilderness and dungeon exploration mirror each other somewhat. These are built around the options of exploring a new place, traveling through somewhere you’ve been, searching where you are, and a grab bag action called regrouping. Ocean exploration is much more abstract.
In terms of time and distance, dungeon exploration is the most zoomed in, while ocean exploration is the most zoomed out. Dungeon exploration relies mostly on light, wilderness exploration mostly on food, and ocean exploration mostly on the weather.
Time and Distance
New units of time and distance are needed to handle exploration at the right level of abstraction. The units of time are watches of roughly four hours and exploration turns of roughly ten minutes. The units of distance are overland hexes of 3 miles across, ocean hexes of 24 miles across, and dungeon rooms of roughly 1,000 square feet.
Watches and used for wilderness exploration, days for ocean exploration, and turns for dungeon exploration. The company sheet has a calender to track the passage of days.
The term watch for four hour blocks comes from Hot Springs Island (not sure if it came from somewhere else first), and I really like that level of abstraction for wilderness exploration. It keeps the pace moving, which is important for a game featuring resource management. The AD&D 1E encounter system was broken up into six different time periods as well, although that was only used for encounter checks, not as a unifying way to track time.
Turns are a B/X legacy term, going all the way back to the wargaming roots of D&D. I’m not fond of the word turn to describe ten minutes, but it has lots of cultural inertia behind it. Black Hack uses hours, minutes, and seconds to describe these time structures, which is consistent and matches casual language. However, the fact that the terms are plural makes speech a little clunky in a more procedural game like Lavender Hack.
Roles
Each type of exploration has different roles players can take, such as quartermaster or cook or scout. Frequently, these roles are related to a resource die. For example, the cook is responsible for food and the quartermaster responsible for gear.
These roles are a way to further highlight each character during travel. When a character takes a role, they can manage the associated resource die, and will be spotlighted during any events that feature the role.
Exploration Sheets
There are sheets at the back of the book for each type of exploration. These sheets assist in tracking resources and time. Miniatures may be placed on the sheet to track each exploration role. In the case of ocean exploration, the sheet also has room to track details about the ship.
Travel
The minigames in the following chapters are mainly about exploration, that is, moving around in unknown lands. For travel along known routes, this fast travel procedure can be used.
Along roads, characters can travel four overland hexes each day, not factoring in extra speed from land transport. In the ocean, the number of hexes traveled each day depends on the type of boat.
The value of resource dice depends on cost of living expenses incurred at the end of downtime. See Ending Downtime (page 69).
Fast Travel
When traveling a well known route, determine the total number of days needed to reach the destination, then the spotlight player makes a general test. On a
Critical, the journey is full of good fortune! It takes half as long as expected, and food is foraged along the way. Do not roll the food die.
Strong Success, the company makes good time. It takes half as long as expected. Roll the food die for every 2 days of travel.
Weak Success, travel takes as long as expected. Roll the food die for every 2 days of travel.
Miss, the journey is mired in bad weather and misfortune! It takes twice as long as expected. Roll the food die for every 2 days of travel.
Fumble, the journey couldn’t have been worse! It takes twice as long as expected, and resources are very stretched. Roll the food die for each day of travel.
Too far down this rabbit hole and the game starts looking like a fantasy version of Traveler. Use the Valuable Types (page 26) table to come up with some supply and demand results for a set of cities and ports, and you’re on your way to arbitrage heaven. Or hell, depending on your view of such things.
Actually, if you really wanted to drift a game in that direction, you would probably want some form of encounter options, because much of the fun of Traveler is getting waylaid. Travel never goes smoothly.

